# INCEpTION CAS Annotation Extractor

This repository contains Python tools for extracting annotations from XMI files generated by [INCEpTION](https://inception-project.github.io/) using the UIMA CAS framework. The main goal of this tool is to help scholars extract linguistic annotations from INCEpTION's XMI files for further analysis.

## Theoretical Background

This tool complements the theoretical guidelines for the annotation process described in **Farina (2024)**. 

## Dependencies

To run this notebook, you'll need to install the required libraries. You can easily install them using the following:

If you haven't already, install the required libraries via the `requirements.txt`:

   ```bash
   pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Or, alternatively, you can install the libraries individually:

```
pip install dkpro-cassis lxml
```

## Files

`extract_annotations.ipynb`: Jupyter Notebook that contains the code to extract annotations from XMI files.

`typesystem.xml`: The type system XML file required to load the annotation types.

`requirements.txt`: List of Python libraries needed to run the notebook.

`LICENSE`: This repository is licensed under the MIT License.

# How to use

1. Prepare your files: Place your XMI files (the annotated data) and `typesystem.xml` in the same directory as the Jupyter notebook.
   The XMI files contain the text annotations from INCEpTION.
   The `typesystem.xml` file defines the annotation types and is required for loading the annotations correctly.

3. Open the notebook: Open the `extract_annotations.ipynb` file using Jupyter Notebook.

4. Run the cells: Execute the code cells in the notebook sequentially. The notebook will process your XMI files and extract the annotations into dictionaries. The code includes examples for different types of layers of annotation. You can use those that are more relevant to your analysis and/or annotation type.

# License

This repository is licensed under the MIT License. You are free to use, modify, and distribute it, with attribution.

## Citation

If you use this tool in your research, please cite it as follows:

> Farina, A. (2025). *INCEpTION CAS Annotation Extractor*. Available at: https://github.com/farina-andrea/inception-cas-extractor  
> Farina, A. (2024). *Guidelines for a linguistic annotation of preverbed verbs of motion*. King’s College London. Figshare. https://doi.org/10.18742/25055573.







